all right so here's the problem with
weed you know so as a psychiatrist i
recognize that there are medical uses
for marijuana
um
i think the most convincing
medical reason i've seen for using
marijuana is to help people with opioid
addiction that's kind of
counterintuitive
but it does seem to work well
because there are a lot of physiologic
problems that happen with happen with
heavy opiate use that sort of get better
and i think on balance it's a good thing
to do you know has to be prescribed and
stuff like that
the basic issue with marijuana you have
to understand how marijuana works in the
brain so the first thing is that
marijuana works on these things called
anandamide receptors so the anandamide
receptor
was coined by an indian guy i assume i
think he was indian because he named it
after the sanskrit word for bliss
so he was like what there are these
bliss receptors in our brain and that's
what like marijuana acts on
so a lot of people think that marijuana
acts like makes people stupider right so
people say like oh i've been smoking pot
my entire life like my accused fine so
marijuana doesn't work like that what
marijuana does i think is far more
insidious
so if you look at the cannabinoid system
in the brain it involves habit formation
and motivation
so like once a how can i say this early
on in the brain
when you are reinforcing a behavior it
is the dopamine system that reinforces a
behavior
once you have a habit formed the primary
neurotransmitter is no longer dopamine
it's
cannabinoids
so for example like the first time i
brush my teeth i may really enjoy it or
let's talk about video game addiction
for example
so the first time i play video game it's
a lot of fun i have it's dopaminergic i
enjoy it then i want to play again and i
want to play again and each time i get
less dopamine less dopamine less
dopamine and if you guys have been
addicted to video games you understand
at some point you cross this critical
threshold
where you keep playing the game
but you stop having fun
and it's like what the hell is going on
at that point why are you even doing it
if you're no it's no longer even
rewarding
so the interesting thing is if you
understand neuroscience there's like
actually a good reason for that and
that's that like the shift of the
behavior
moves from a reward circuit to a
habituated circuit
so habits in the brain are governed by a
different circuit than like the dopamine
system so the nucleus accumbens
mesolimbic system those are both
dopaminergic systems that involve
pleasure followed by behavioral
reinforcement
at some point you move into the
autopilot circuits which are different
circuits of the brain and once you enter
an autopilot it's not like there's any
reward right so if you think about
brushing your teeth there's like no
reward there anymore right even if you
think about dogs for example when you're
training a dog at the very beginning in
order to get them to fetch you have to
give them a reward because there's no
inherent dopaminergic reward for
fetching a ball or a stick so you throw
the ball when the dog brings it you give
them a treat boom they get a hit of
dopamine you do it again boom they get a
hit of dopamine boom they get get a hit
of dopamine you do that 10 times 20
times 30 times their brain becomes
habituated to it it enters kind of the
cannabinoid system and you no longer
need to provide a dopamine dopaminergic
reward to engage in the behavior you all
get that
gaming is the same once you move over to
the cannabinoid system then it becomes a
habit then it becomes hard to break
despite the fact that it's not even fun
so why is marijuana a problem
i don't know exactly how but marijuana
screws up that circuit
marijuana makes it hard my observation
clinical observation okay so now like we
know that basic neuroscience but we
don't know that that neuroscience
actually translates to human behavior
i haven't seen those studies yet i don't
think our stuff is sophisticated enough
but clinically what i've seen is when
people use pot they fall into this this
weird habitual non-enjoyment way easier
they like fall into bad habits and it's
really really hard to get them out of
those habits
and what i've discovered is that if i
can get them sober from marijuana their
ability to change their habits becomes
way easier
okay so someone's saying
okay so sorry for me throwing out a lot
of words
and you're confused
do you all get that or not
so here's a quick summary
our brain has two circuits
one is a reward circuit
that we release dopamine which allows us
to feel pleasure and reinforces a
behavior so for example i'm drinking
this iced coffee right now and it tastes
good
[Music]
so when i drink it i get a hit of
dopamine and it's like oh i want more
over time if you look at people who
develop addictive behaviors
they still engage in the behavior but
they don't actually feel any pleasure
from it
the reason for that is because we have a
separate circuit of the brain that
starts to take over which is the habit
circuit
so once something becomes a habit it no
longer gives us a reward
but it's still we're still driven to do
it even though we don't enjoy it anymore
so when we get addicted to a video game
and we just start like playing video
games and like we don't even enjoy them
anymore that's a problem of our habit
circuit getting messed up and the habit
circuit's primary neurotransmitter is an
endocannabinoid
or a cannabinoid it's an endo means
it's basically internal thc right it's a
cannabis compound like neurotransmitter
that is built within us so when people
use marijuana the biggest problem that i
see is it becomes hard for them to break
habits i'm not quite sure how it works
but i suspect that it has something to
do with the fact that the cannabinoid
receptors in the brain the marijuana
receptors in the brain have something to
do with habit formation and habit
execution
and when people smoke pot it's just hard
for them to make changes in their life
is that better
yeah so people are asking um do you have
any advice for medical cannabis users
that's where like i think you should
talk to your doctor because the risks
and benefits
are like individualized right so like
when i think about using medical
cannabis i look at an individual person
i think about okay what are the risks
what are the benefits what do we gain
what do we lose and for each individual
person or situation it's going to be
slightly different
i quit we three weeks ago and i still
get cold sweats and very vivid dreams is
that normal i'm not sure
to be honest
so that too is something that you should
talk to your doctor about because
cold sweats and vivid dreams
how can i say this
so you guys understand that like a
substance causes particular changes
but the substance acts within an in
within an individual body
which means that like
you know so the reason how does that
make sense like there's an individual so
if you talk about the effects of
marijuana
there is no such thing technically as
the effects of marijuana because the
marijuana has to act within a human
being so the effects of marijuana are
going to be filtered through an
individual human being
so when we talk about the effects of
marijuana basically what we're doing is
averaging the effects within a thousand
individuals and sort of saying this is
the effect of the drug which is
scientifically valid but in terms of any
individual case there's going to be a
slightly different presentation because
your receptors your metabolism your
brain is going to be different which
means i can take one compound
and put it in a thousand people and
it'll act slightly differently that's
why if you look at like you know
protocols for medication
it's not like there's one antidepressant
that works equally for all people
we have 30 antidepressants that each
have different efficacy within different
people
and so that's what's tricky about
medicine it's also what makes it fun
because it's not like there's a
one-size-fits-all solution
so in terms of your particular
relationship to a substance there's
going to be a lot of individuation there
you